[feat]: Associated Items (#932)
cairo-book/cairo-book: src/ch11-10-associated-items.md

[associated functions]: ./ch05-03-method-syntax.md#associated-functions
[associated constants]: ./ch11-10-associated-items-in-traits.md#associated-constants
[associated implementations]: ./ch11-10-associated-items-in-traits.md#associated-implementations

Associated items are useful when they are logically related to the implementation. For example, the `is_some` method on `Option` is intrinsically related to Options, so should be associated.

Every associated item kind comes in two varieties: definitions that contain the actual implementation and declarations that declare signatures for definitions.

## Associated Types

Associated types are _type aliases_ allowing you to define abstract type placeholders within traits. Instead of specifying concrete types in the trait definition, associated types let trait implementors choose the actual types to use. This provides a flexible way to define traits with "placeholder" types that get filled in later.

Let's consider the following `Pack` trait:

```cairo, noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_10_associated_types/src/lib.cairo:associated_types}}
```

> The type `Result` is a placeholder, and the method’s definition that follows shows that it will return values of type `Self::Result`. Implementors of the `Pack` trait will specify the concrete type for `Result`, and the next method will return a value of that concrete type.

Author: nice

Let's suppose now that a function `foo` needs the ability to pack 2 variables of type `T`. If we had defined a `PackGeneric` trait with an additional generic parameter that is used to describe the result, then this trait and one potential implementation using `u32` type for the generic arguments and `u64` for the result would have looked like this:

```cairo, noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_10_associated_types/src/lib.cairo:generics_usage}}
```

with `foo` being implemented as follows:

```cairo, noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_10_associated_types/src/lib.cairo:foo}}
```

> However, when using associated types, we can get the result type from the impl of `Pack`, and we don’t need to pollute `foo` with an additional generic argument. In the following snippet, we define a `PackU32Impl` impl of `Pack<T>` trait with `Result` type being a `u64` :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice how `foo` needs to specify both `T` and `U` as generic parameters. Now, let's compare this to our `Pack` trait with an associated type:
```

```cairo, noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_10_associated_types/src/lib.cairo:associated_types_impl}}
```

with `bar` function corresponding to the `foo` function but using an associated type:

```cairo, noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_10_associated_types/src/lib.cairo:bar}}
```

Finally, we can run `foo`, and `bar` in our `main` and see that they both produce the same result:

```cairo
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_10_associated_types/src/lib.cairo:main}}
```

> The point is that `bar` doesn't need to use a second generic type for the packing result type, this information is actually associated with the impl of the `Pack` trait.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, `bar` doesn't need to specify a second generic type for the packing result. This information is hidden in the implementation of the `Pack` trait, making the function signature cleaner and more flexible. Associated types allow us to express the same functionality with less verbosity, while still maintaining the flexibility of generic programming.
```

## Associated Constants

Associated constants are constants associated with a type. They are declared using the `const` keyword and are defined in a trait or implementation.
In our next example, we are building a game with two character types &mdash; `Wizard` and `Warrior`, and each character type has a constant `strength` attribute. We can model this scenario as follows:

> ```cairo, noplayground

Reviewer: Some remarks about this example:

- 1. TheCharacter trait is tightly coupled to specific enemy types. WizardCharacter is explicitly tied to Warrior, and vice versa? This is problematic if we want to add a new character type later, like a Dwarven Warrior, as we'd have to go back and modify all our existing implementations.
- 2. The Character trait is doing a lot of heavy lifting. It's defining character attributes (like strength) and also handling battle mechanics with the fight method.  Each part of our code should only be responsible for one thing, and this is related to problem 1.
- 3. Overall this design makes it a bit tricky to add new features or change how battles work without touching our existing code

I know that this is purely to demonstrate the principle of associated constants, but we need to ensure the examples make perfect sense, when taken out of the concept they explain.

I dove a bit too far in this example, trying to figure out how you would actually write this properly and in an entirely generic way and came up with something that would be like this. 
Of course it's way too verbose to use as an example. We can probably come up with something a lot simpler. But I liked the design of the battle mechanism

```rust
trait HasHp<T> {
    fn get_hp(self: @T) -> u32;
    fn set_hp(ref self: T, new_hp: u32);
}

#[derive(Copy, Drop)]
struct Wizard {
    hp: u32
}

impl WizardHp of HasHp<Wizard> {
    fn get_hp(self: @Wizard) -> u32 {
        *self.hp
    }
    fn set_hp(ref self: Wizard, new_hp: u32) {
        self.hp = new_hp;
    }
}

#[derive(Copy, Drop)]
struct Warrior {
    hp: u32
}

impl WarriorHp of HasHp<Warrior> {
    fn get_hp(self: @Warrior) -> u32 {
        *self.hp
    }
    fn set_hp(ref self: Warrior, new_hp: u32) {
        self.hp = new_hp;
    }
}

trait Character<T> {
    const STRENGTH: u32;
}

impl WizardCharacter of Character<Wizard> {
    const STRENGTH: u32 = 50;
}

impl WarriorCharacter of Character<Warrior> {
    const STRENGTH: u32 = 100;
}

trait Battle<T, E, impl TCharacter: Character<T>, impl ECharacter: Character<E>> {
    fn fight(ref self: T, ref enemy: E);
}

impl CharacterBattle<
T, E,
+Drop<T>,
+Drop<E>,
impl TCharacter: Character<T>,
impl ECharacter: Character<E>,
impl THp: HasHp<T>,
impl EHp: HasHp<E>
> of Battle<T, E, TCharacter, ECharacter> {
fn fight(ref self: T, ref enemy: E) {
    // Narrate the start of the fight
    println!("The battle begins!");

    // Self attacks enemy
    let initial_enemy_hp = EHp::get_hp(@enemy);
    if initial_enemy_hp <= TCharacter::STRENGTH {
        println!("The enemy has been defeated!");
        return;
    }
    let new_enemy_hp = initial_enemy_hp - TCharacter::STRENGTH.into();
    EHp::set_hp(ref enemy, new_enemy_hp.try_into().unwrap());

    println!("Our hero strikes with {} strength!", TCharacter::STRENGTH);
    println!("The enemy's HP drops from {} to {}!", initial_enemy_hp, new_enemy_hp);

    // Enemy attacks self
    let initial_self_hp = THp::get_hp(@self);
    if initial_self_hp <= ECharacter::STRENGTH {
        println!("Our hero has been defeated!");
        return;
    }
    let new_self_hp = initial_self_hp - ECharacter::STRENGTH.into();
    THp::set_hp(ref self, new_self_hp.try_into().unwrap());

    println!("The enemy retaliates with {} strength!", ECharacter::STRENGTH);
    println!("Our hero's HP drops from {} to {}!", initial_self_hp, new_self_hp);

    // Narrate the end of the fight
    println!("The dust settles as both fighters catch their breath...");
}
}

#[derive(Copy, Drop)]
struct DwarvenWarrior {
    hp: u32
}

impl DwarvenWarriorCharacter of Character<DwarvenWarrior> {
    const STRENGTH: u32 = 100;
}

impl DwarvenWarriorHp of HasHp<DwarvenWarrior> {
    fn get_hp(self: @DwarvenWarrior) -> u32 {
        *self.hp
    }
    fn set_hp(ref self: DwarvenWarrior, new_hp: u32) {
        self.hp = new_hp;
    }
}

fn main() {
    let mut wizard = Wizard { hp: 300 };
    let mut warrior = Warrior { hp: 100 };
    CharacterBattle::fight(ref wizard, ref warrior);

    let mut dwarven_warrior = DwarvenWarrior { hp: 100 };
    println!("A dwarven warrior appears!");
    CharacterBattle::fight(ref wizard, ref dwarven_warrior);
}
```

Author: yeah i noticed that a character is tied to another... will use the other example you provided
thanks

> ```cairo, noplayground

Reviewer: example proposal:

```
trait Shape<T> {
    const SIDES: u32;
    fn describe() -> ByteArray;
}

struct Triangle {}
impl TriangleShape of Shape<Triangle> {
    const SIDES: u32 = 3;
    fn describe() -> ByteArray {
        "I am a triangle"
    }
}

struct Square {}
impl SquareShape of Shape<Square> {
    const SIDES: u32 = 4;
    fn describe() -> ByteArray {
        "I am a square"
    }
}

fn print_shape_info<T, impl ShapeImpl: Shape<T>>() {
    println!("This shape has {} sides. {}", ShapeImpl::SIDES, ShapeImpl::describe());
}

fn main() {
    print_shape_info::<Triangle>();
    print_shape_info::<Square>();
}
```

{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_11_associated_consts/src/lib.cairo:associated_consts}}
```

Since `strength` is fixed per character type, associated consts allow us to bind this constant number to the character trait rather than adding it to the struct or just hardcoding the value in the implementation. It provides an overall more elegant solution.

A potential battle between a `Warrior` and a `Wizard` could look like this:

```cairo
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_11_associated_consts/src/lib.cairo:battle}}
```

## Associated Implementations

> Associated implementations allow you to declare that a trait implementation must exist for an associated type. This feature is particularly useful when you want to enforce relationships between types and implementations at the trait level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Associated implementations allow you to declare that a trait implementation must exist for an associated type. This feature is particularly useful when you want to enforce relationships between types and implementations at the trait level. It ensures type safety and consistency across different implementations of a trait, which is important in generic programming contexts.
```

> To understand the utility of associated impls, let's examine the `Iterator` and `IntoIterator` traits from the Cairo core library, with their respective implementations using `ArrayIter<T>` struct as the collection type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand the utility of associated implementations, let's examine the `Iterator` and `IntoIterator` traits from the Cairo core library, with their respective implementations using `ArrayIter<T>` as the collection type:
```

```cairo, noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_12_associated_impls/src/lib.cairo:associated_impls}}
```

> In this example, the `IntoIterator` trait has an associated type `IntoIter` and an associated impl `Iterator: Iterator<Self::IntoIter>`. Let's break down why this is useful:
> 
> 1. The `IntoIterator` trait is designed to convert a collection into an iterator.
> 2. The `IntoIter` associated type represents the specific iterator type that will be created.
> 3. The associated implementation `Iterator: Iterator<Self::IntoIter>` declares that this `IntoIter` type must implement the `Iterator` trait.
> 
> This design ensures that any type implementing `IntoIterator` will produce an iterator that adheres to the `Iterator` trait. The associated implementation creates a binding at the trait level, guaranteeing that:
> 
> - The `into_iter` method will always return a type that implements `Iterator`.
> - This relationship is enforced for all implementations of `IntoIterator`, not just on a case-by-case basis.
> 
> The following `main` function creates an array of `felt252`, converts it into an `ArrayIter` type and ultimately uses the `Iterator` implementation to print each element:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The `IntoIterator` trait is designed to convert a collection into an iterator.
2. The `IntoIter` associated type represents the specific iterator type that will be created. This allows different collections to define their own efficient iterator types.
3. The associated implementation `Iterator: Iterator<Self::IntoIter>` (the key feature we're discussing) declares that this `IntoIter` type must implement the `Iterator` trait.
4. This design allows for type-safe iteration without needing to specify the iterator type explicitly every time, improving code ergonomics.

The associated implementation creates a binding at the trait level, guaranteeing that:

- The `into_iter` method will always return a type that implements `Iterator`.
- This relationship is enforced for all implementations of `IntoIterator`, not just on a case-by-case basis.

The following `main` function demonstrates how this works in practice for an `Array<felt252>`:
```

(same but re-formatted, very few additions)

## Associated Types

Associated types are _type aliases_ allowing you to define abstract type placeholders within traits. Instead of specifying concrete types in the trait definition, associated types let trait implementers choose the actual types to use.

Let's consider the following `Pack` trait:

```cairo, noplayground
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch11-advanced-features/listing_10_associated_types/src/lib.cairo:associated_types}}
```

> The `Result` type in our `Pack` trait acts as placeholders for a type that will be filled in later. Think of associated types as leaving a blank space in your trait for each implementation to write in the specific type it needs. This approach keeps your trait definition clean and flexible. When you use the trait, you don't need to worry about specifying these types - they're already chosen for you by the implementation. In our `Pack` trait, the type `Result` is such a placeholder. The method's definition shows that it will return values of type `Self::Result`, but it doesn't specify what `Result` actually is. This is left to the implementers of the `Pack` trait, who will specify the concrete type for `Result`. When the `pack` method is called, it will return a value of that chosen concrete type, whatever it may be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Result` type in our `Pack` trait acts as placeholder for a type that will be filled in later. Think of associated types as leaving a blank space in your trait for each implementation to write in the specific type it needs. This approach keeps your trait definition clean and flexible. When you use the trait, you don't need to worry about specifying these types - they're already chosen for you by the implementation. In our `Pack` trait, the type `Result` is such a placeholder. The method's definition shows that it will return values of type `Self::Result`, but it doesn't specify what `Result` actually is. This is left to the implementers of the `Pack` trait, who will specify the concrete type for `Result`. When the `pack` method is called, it will return a value of that chosen concrete type, whatever it may be.
```

Author: indeed! thanks!
